Inclusive Classrooms

As professors and instructors at UCR, there are many ways to bring principles of inclusivity into 
the classroom. Our diverse student body is one of UCR’s greatest strengths and the tips below 
will help you think critically about how your classroom supports success for all of our students.

Course Content

As you plan your syllabus, remember to provide multiple perspectives 
on issues and to highlight material by people from different 
backgrounds. If your course focuses on a particular group of people, 
make sure that some of your readings are written by people from that 
group. Making sure you have course content that represents and was 
produced by people from a wide range of backgrounds will deepen 
your students’ understanding of the material and the issues at hand. 

Student Accommodations

Make it easy for students to address their need for accommodations 
such as absences for religious holidays or additional time on a test 
due to a disability. In your introductory email, invite students to 

reply with any such needs rather than simply including a paragraph 
on accommodations at the end of your syllabus. This email is also a 
good time to ask students for their preferred names and pronouns so 
they do not have to correct misgendering or other issues in public.

Grading and Attendance

Be careful to avoid confirmation bias in grading. Assess work without 
reference to the student as often as possible by bending down the 
corner to hide student names before grading or asking students to 
attach a cover sheet to the back of the assignment. Ensure that 

attendance is recorded fairly by taking it each day rather than relying 
on your memory so that hyper-visible students are not disadvantaged 
as their absence is more noticable. Remember that your students are 
people too for whom major life events can happen in the middle of 
your course. Err on the side of compassion when it comes to 

attendance issues. 

Recognize How Power Works

Be aware of the way social inequities play out in your classroom and 
proactively address problems such as certain students dominating 
conversations or students being consistently interrupted. Be 

careful not to rely on students to speak as representatives their 

identity groups. 

Recognize your own power in the classroom and work to facilitate 
an environment where students can productively critique the course 
material, their peers’ ideas, and your ideas. Treat dissenting opinions 
with respect and seriousness.



